AsthmaProject
================
Niall Ryan

# Outline

## Background 
Asthma is a chronic inflammatory lung disease caused by a complex combination of genetic and environmental factors (Chipps, 2004). It is one of the most common non-communicable diseases and a major cause of morbidity, disability, and quality of life deterioration, affecting more than 300 million people worldwide (The Global Asthma Report 2018, 2018). Both the mechanisms underlying asthma and its causes are not completely understood, with recent research suggesting that the disease prevalence cannot be attributed to a single factor or a set of non-interacting factors (Dharmage et al., 2019). Although, in general, the number of cases of asthma is expected to grow globally, there are significant differences in asthma prevalence between countries and geographic regions (To et al., 2012). child vs adult morbidity, severity, and mortality obesity and allergy. Non-equitable access to health care due to race, ethnicity, and socio-economic disparities is often linked to higher levels of disease prevalence, morbidity, and severity in disadvantaged communities. In the US, the number of cases of the most common severe diseases, such as cancer or diabetes, is disproportionately larger among the non-white population (Williams et al., 2016). Similar findings are reported for respiratory diseases (Celedón et al., 2014), emphasising higher smoking prevalence and rates of pollution as major contributors to respiratory health inequities. At the same time, one of the suggested factors contributing to asthma prevalence is urbanisation, which implies that wealth may be positively associated with the number of asthma cases. This argument finds support in empirical studies; in general, wealthier communities are expected to have a higher prevalence of asthma while economically disadvantaged regions tend to see more severe cases (Cruz et al., 2010; Dharmage et al., 2019; To et al., 2012). Poverty and socio-demographics controlling for urbanisation, the evidence for higher risk of asthma dependent on socio-demographics remains consistent (Williams et al., 2009). Apart from health care access, smoking, and pollution, other explanations for disparities based on socio-economic factors include health, literacy and education, stress and mental health, and population clustering. All asthma determinants discussed so far are modifiable and, thus, empirical results obtained from investigating them can be used to directly inform health care and socio-economic equity policies. However, exploring the effects of non-modifiable risk-factors is important as well since, e.g., genetic factors may interact with non-modifiable factors and alter the associated asthma outcomes (Chipps, 2004; Martinez, 2006). Another non-modifiable factor that significantly affects asthma prevalence and severity is gender – women, especially younger women, are more likely to develop asthma symptoms, and the symptoms tend to be more pronounced (Pignataro et al., 2017). Investigating the direct effects of non-modifiable risk factors and their interactions with modifiable factors provides relevant evidence for understanding the population differences in asthma prevalence and designing personalised intervention policies (Greenblatt et al., 2017; Williams et al., 2016). 

## Data and Methods 

Data 

This study combines 5 cycles (10 years) of NHANES data from 2009 to 2018 into a single sample. The dependent variable is current diagnosis of asthma, coded from two responses from the NHANES questionnaire: “Has a doctor or other health professional ever told you that you have asthma?” and “Do you still have asthma?". The respondents who answered "yes" are classified as having asthma; the respondents who answered "no" to the first question are classified as healthy. The sample also includes respondents’ gender, age, ethnicity, education, BMI, smoking status, and poverty indicator. Following (Greenblatt et al., 2017), the poverty indicator is recoded into a binary variable that takes value 0 if the respondent household income is below the poverty line and 1 otherwise. Likewise, the education variable is recoded with two levels – high school education or below and above high school education. Respondents of age below 22 are excluded from the sample to avoid bias in education responses. After dropping missing responses and responses such as ”I don’t know" or “Refuse to answer”, the sample size is N = 10553. 

Primary analysis 

For primary analysis, the combined sample is considered a sample of independent observations, not representative of the US population. Since the observations are independent, we can treat the sample as a cross-sectional survey at a single time point and conduct the analyses accordingly (Firebaugh, 1997). A problem with this approach, of course, is that it assumes that the relationship between predictors and the asthma outcome is constant across time. To mitigate that, all estimated models are compared with models that include, additionally, a year dummy. The binary dependent variable implies a classification problem. The response classes are highly unbalanced with only about 10.25% of the respondents having asthma. The main model used in the analyses is logistic regression with resampling. 

Alternative methods

LDA/QDA not applicable because predictors are mostly factors. KNN may be used if BMI is recoded as categorical. RF modified for imbalanced data may be used as well (Chen, 2004). 

Validation 

Following primary analyses, the results are validated using a logistic regression model that accounts for the complex survey design of NHANES. The validation analysis assumes that the combined sample is representative of the US population and uses the survey R package.

